Prof Milgram's Experiment Prof Milgram’s Experiment Just how far are we prepared to go when acting under the orders of someone else? It is a quest ion that has been at the centre of a num ber of news stories, such as the alleged mass-suicide in Uganda of hun dreds of members of a reli- gious cult. I have to admit that my usual reaction to such stories is to think that such things on ly happen to people with feet of clay— and brains to match. It is certainly a lot more comforting than the alternative, which is to think that we too might be equall y vulnerable to the infl uence of au thori ty. But for years I have heard dark references to an ex periment done years ago by an American psychologist, which allegedly proved that even the nicest peop le can be turned into amoral automatons with terrifying ease. Sitting in the offi ce of a psychologist friend, I fi nally discovered the source of these stories. Th ere on his shelves was a copy of Obedience to Authori ty, pub lished in 1974 by Stanley Milgram, a pro fessor of psychology at the City Univer sity of New York. Prof Milgram’s book is a chill- ingly matter-of-fact account of the outcome of that experi- ment of which I had heard so many tantalising reports. Th e book recounts how, while at Yale University between 1960 and 1963, Prof Milgram recruited members of the public to take part in what was advertised as a “study of memory”. After being told that the study would look at the eff ect of punishment on learni ng, the recruits were led to a room to wit ness the “pupil”, a man in his forties be ing strapped to a chair and wired up to elect rodes. A researcher explained that these would deliver shocks to the pupil, adding that while these could be extremely painful, they would cause no perman ent tissue damage. Th e recruits were then told to read out a list of word associations—and to give the pupil an electric shock if he made mist akes, using a console with switches going from 15 volts to 450, and marked “Slight Shock” all the way up to “Danger: Se vere Shock”. Th e experiment then began. Th e scien tist in charge would instruct the recruit to deliver a shock at the next level of voltage, and to call out what voltage it was, each time the pupil blundered. – 2 t Although separated by a wall, the re cruits could hear the pupil next door. And as the mistakes accumulated, so the pro tests from the room grew louder, turning to cries and then agonised screams. Recruits who started to de mur were told that they had to cont inue, those who really kicked up a fuss were told they had no choice but to continue. And despite all the screams from the room next door almost two-thirds of the recruits went all the way to the 450 volts —long after the pupil’s screams had been replaced by an ominous silence. What the recruits did not know was that the pupil was a stooge, his “screams” just tape-recordings. But the results were all too genuine, and stunned everyone, in clud ing Prof Milgram. It seemed that ordinary peo ple—profes- sional engineers, care work ers, housewives—could be per- suaded to deliver lethal shocks to a perfect stranger by some one assuming authority. His experiment exploded many comf ort ing myths; women, for example, proved no less likel y than men to go the whole way. Indeed, about the only remote ly comforti ng fi nding lay in the reaction of one re cruit, who refused to go beyond 215 volts. She proved to be a German émigré raised in Nazi Germany. Asked if this might have explained her refusal to go on, she said: “Perhaps we have seen too much pain.” Would more people act like she did now, 40 years after Prof Milgram’s ex per i ment? If no more caring than peo- ple in the six ties, perhaps we are more likely to question authority. Cer tain ly it would be comforting to think so, but the only way to know would be to carry out a similar kind of experiment. However, it is an experiment unlikely to be repeated any time soon. For one can just ima gine the law-suits that would come from all those nice, law-abiding recruits demanding compensation for the psychol ogical trauma of being revealed for what they really are. Sunday Telegraph 2 –