Plagued by Cures In the following text there are gaps which indicate that somethin out. Look at the four alternatives that correspond to each gap and one best fi ts the gap. Th en mark your choice on your answer shee Plagued by Cures Th e feather in the cap of 20th-century medicine is the pre ven tious diseases, especially in childh ood. Smallpox was eradic ago. Th anks to extra ordinary international 17_____ (includ in wars just so that vaccinations could be ad ministered), polio of going the same way. Measles, mumps and whooping coug pre vented with vaccines, and their incidence has declined d the past 50 years. Even some less tracta ble diseases, such as started to bend to int er ventions. Covering more beds with ne to be remarkably eff ect ive, perhaps as eff ective as vac cina tion the incidence of this disease. 18_____ the triumph is by no means complete. It is, o known that preventing or treating an infec tious disease can h eff ects on the path o genic organism that causes it. Th e evol resistant strains is the most famous example of such an eff a new worry has emerged. It appears that intervening in in have undesirable eff ects on the hosts—that is, on people—as pathogens thems elves. Th e fi rst possible eff ect is the replacement of one dise ase by a incidence of childhood infections has fallen, chronic ailment betes and asth ma, have become more 19_____. In parts of th childhood diseases are still common, these chronic ailm ents a A direct link between these two phenomena is not yet pro be because there isn’t one. Doctors in rich countries have t to detect, and the mone y to treat, chronic disease. In poor co dis eases—if detected at all—are low on the list of priorities, a fore go unreported. However, a number of studies suggest th the whole explanation. Instead, childhood 20_____ do in re duce the probability of chronic disease—an idea known as hypothesis”. Th – 8 ng has been left d decide which et. Alternatives n tion of infec- 17. cated 25 years A eff orts ding cease-fi res B research is on the verge C confl icts gh can also be D funding dramatically in malaria, have ets has proved 18. ns, at reducing A So B Consequently of course, well C Furthermore have profound D Yet lution of drug ff ect. But now nfections may 19. well as on the A uncommon B harmless another. As the C frequent ts, such as dia- D deadly he world where are rare. oven. Th is may 20. the experience A experiences ountries, such B vaccines and may there- C problems hat this is not D infections ndeed seem to s the “hygiene he Economist 8 – TIME LEFT, CHECK YOUR ANSWERS.