Vegetarianism

In the following text there are gaps which indicate that something has been left out. Look at the four alternatives that correspond to each gap and decide which one best fits the gap. Then mark your choice on your answer sheet. British nineteenth-century proponents of vegetarianism had high hopes for their movement. They tended to see themselves as on the side of history, in the vanguard of moral __1__ . In their imagined future, meat eating would be seen as being as barbarous as slavery, racism and homophobia. Government data suggests that no more than 2 to 3 per cent of the population eschews meat, while groups with a vested interest bump this up to roughly 5 per cent. Yet, whatever measure you use, it is clear the number of vegetarians has not been rising over recent decades on either side of the Atlantic. __2__ , studies suggest that anything between 50 and 84 per cent of those who give up meat eventually go back to being carnivores. When I became a “sort of” vegetarian 25 years ago, vegetarianism was the only practical alternative to cruelly, intensively reared animal products. But as interest in animal welfare has increased, it has become much easier to buy products certified free-range or organic. Further, while growing animal feed on viable arable land is wasteful, it makes good sense to graze animals on pastures not __3__ to crops edible by humans and to use by-products of the human food chain to fatten livestock. And to leave all the fish in the sea would be to deprive ourselves of an invaluable resource. In turn, the health evidence __4__ some, but much less, meat eating: the consensus among dieticians is that the optimal human diet contains relatively small amounts of animal protein and fat. The vegetarian movement has done society a great __5__ by putting important issues on the agenda. But the most sensible conclusion to draw is that we ought to eat fewer, better-reared animal products. Arguably, in my view the future belongs not to vegetarians and vegans but to discerning “flexitarians” and conscientious omnivores. Julian Baggini, New Statesman