To Err is Human From a review of a book by Robert Youngson on Th e former British Astronomer Royal Richard Woolley assured us “All this talk of space travel is utter bilge”, fi ve years before Yuri Gagarin fi rst orbited the Earth. Blunders like this are made often enough in science and great fun is to be had laughing at them with the confi dence that comes with hinds ight. In Scientifi c Blunders, Robert Young son makes hay of scientifi c howl ers in this impressively wide-rang ing collec- tion of some of the most egregious errors that scientists, tech nol o gists and even philosophers have made over the past 2500 years. So that we thoroughly understand each story, he throws in quite a bit of history. Th e lessons of the past teach us that, in their search for truth, scientists have made a virtue of error. When ever they publish what they claim is an important new idea or experi men tal result, they know their colleagues will take it to pieces looking for logic al or experimental errors. Th is ruth less ness towards mistakes has been one of the engines of scientifi c enterp rise. Not that the engine always runs smoothly. Far from it. Th ere is often plenty of room for disagreement over what is a scientifi c fact. And there are ample opportunities for bullies and ign ora muses to win arguments through rheto- ric rather than reason. Th e entire history of science is full of tales of rows, wild-goose chases and ill-fated predictions by people who can’t con ceive of knowledge beyond what they already know. From the book’s title, Youngson ap pears—wisely—to have narrowed down his subject from the vast area of com- mon-or-garden scientifi c error to the comparatively small domain of blund ers, that is, stupid or careless mis takes. But it turns out that he interp rets “blunder” so broadly that it inc ludes now-defunct theories. – 4 n scientifi c blunders Aristotle, arguably the fi rst scient ist, is one of the most eminent victims of this condescension. Youngson im pli- cit ly invites us to scoff at his naiveté for suggesting, for example, that the human embryo arises only from sperm, and that fossils are failed attempts at spontaneous genera- tion from mud. I’d class these as the mis conceptions of a pioneering genius, not as blunders. Nor is George Bernard Shaw shown any mercy. Th e great Irish wag used his jesting to tease and an noy just about everyone, including scientists and especially medi- cal doct ors. So when Shaw says that he mist rusts re sults scientists get in labora tories be cause, if it is unexpected or unac count able, it is liable to be “re-manu factured until it proves what the lab ora tory controller wants it to prove”, does he not have a point? Youngson has done a good job of collecting tales of error and misjudg ment, but he has lost sight of his pur- pose by serving them with too much pop history. It is a pity, too, that he doesn’t give proper references for some of his most telling quo tations, making them unusable as ref- erences and, in some cases, under mining our confi dence in their veracity. Th e concept of the scientifi c blun der is a great theme for a popular book. Youngson has responded with some splendid howlers. But by failing to illuminate how sci- entists continual ly exploit their errors in their quest for truth, he has squandered his original idea. Bit of a blun- der, really. New Scientist 4 –