Small Enterprises Small-scale enterprises common in the private, rural and informal sectors of the economy are relatively unaware of occupational safety and health. Th e latest issue of the ILO’s African Newsletter on Occupational Safety and Health contests the view that it is better to spend money on job creation than on improved safety and health for small enterprises. ILO programmes like WISE (Work Improvements in Small Enterprises) can create immediate improvements in working conditions, productivity and environment while expenditure on improvements even creates job opportunities. Healthy Fats If any nutrient could use an image makeover, it’s fat. Often forgotten in our anti-fat frenzy is the fact that some fats are crucial for proper brain function. Among the good guys: the omega-3 fatty acids, which include linoleic acid—found in soybeans, canola oil, and nuts—as well as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), both plentiful in fi sh. Researchers have long known that infant brains require omega-3s, but now they say it appears these fats infl uence our behavior long after we’ve shed our diapers. No Sex Bias Women of child-bearing age are routinely excluded from drug trials, to prevent damage to fetuses if any women become pregnant. Women’s groups have camp aigned for a change, arguing that for some life-threatening illnesses, such as AIDS, enrolment in a clinical trial off ers the best hope for a patient. – 7 14. What is stated in the newsletter from the ILO? A Job creation is an eff ective way to make work in small companies safer and healthier B Small companies are often more interested in occupational safety and health than large companies C Eff orts to improve working conditions may pay off in terms of more jobs D Working conditions have improved in small-scale enterprises 15. What recent information about omega-3s does the writer give? A They are good for our health B Adults’ health may benefi t from them C Children’s health may benefi t from them D They are found in fi sh 16. What new information in relation to drug trials is presented here? A Women who take part risk the health of their unborn children B Women who have taken part have fallen ill C Women’s groups now have a right to enrol D Women’s groups want women of all ages to be included » 7 – PLEASE TURN OVER