Short Texts AND HERE ARE SOME SHORTER TEXTS: A Good Laugh Herbert Kelleher was the founder and chief executive of Southwest Airlines. Southwest enjoyed both profi ts and labor peace even in the worst years for the industry. Always a showman, Mr. Kelleher settled a minor trade- mark infringe ment dispute in 1992 by arm-wrestling his adversary. He lost—and was carried off on a stretcher with an intravenous line connected to a bottle of Wild Turkey. It was one of the few good laughs heard in the industry in years. Scientifi c Progress Th e majority of scientists bask in the surviving afterglow of the Enlightenment, with its optimistic attitude about the all-conquering power of human reason supplemented by the methods of empirical inquiry. In particular, the hubris of many 20th-century theoretical physicists seems to know no bounds. “A theory of everything” is just round the corner, needing only one more bundle of money to fi nance the ultimate particle accelerator or super-powerful telescope, to put the last pieces of the puzzle in place. St Pancras in the Early 1990s St Pancras is the terminus that time forgot. For years the Victorian fairy tale castle has stood half deserted in its Gothic sleep, while the Midland Hotel that fronts it, is rotting from the roof down, a decaying masterpiece marooned in a sea of sleaze. In a few years’ time, however, all that will have changed. Accord ing to the Government’s new cost-saving plan, Eurocrats will descend on the sta- tion in Continental expresses. What a sublime reversal of fortune for the once-derided redbrick pile that was so nearly bulldozed 30 years ago! – 6 11. Why did people laugh? A Mr. Kelleher had drunk too much liquor B Mr. Kelleher solved a problem in an unusual way C Mr. Kelleher got a punishment he deserved D Mr. Kelleher had made a fool of his competitor 12. What is the writer’s attitude to the promises of scientifi c progress? A Factual B Optimistic C Ironic D Uncritical 13. What is said about St Pancras Station? A It will soon play as important a role as it did in the past B It has always been admired for its fairy tale beauty C It will now make place for a more modern station building D It will be remade into a European conference centre 6 –